---
layout: post
title: Living Through the End of History
tags: Overview
---

## The End of History

During the early 90s Francis Fukuyama wrote a book, 'The End of History and the
Last Man' whose thesis has become the punchline to bitter jokes. In this book he
argued that with the passing of the Soviet Union the world had reached the
apotheosis of historical development with western liberal democracy.

The years have not been kind to this thesis. In many countries we've seen
liberal democracy become more authoritarian and unequal, while other countries
are starting to flirt openly with forms of fascism. Meanwhile the US, supposedly
the poster child for liberal democracy, is falling apart. At the same time it is
increasingly hard to argue that liberal democracy is a good thing, as it fails
to deal with looming environmental apocalypse. 

But I think this is a little unfair to Fukuyama. While I don't agree with him
that liberal democracy is the end point of political development, it is
currently very hard to see any alternative that is better. This is not to say
that such alternatives are not possible, merely that as a species we have so far
failed to create plausible alternatives. We can see this on the left where all
that is on offer are tired forms of social democracy (that fail to acknowledge
their failures), communist-nostalgia, or idealistic forms of anarchism that fail
to grapple with the messy realities of power. 

However liberal democracy, at least in the way that Fukuyama envisages it, does
not seem to be a stable political form either. As we've seen in countless
countries, unless the forces of capital are kept down (by unions, or very high
taxes), they will undermine democracy in pursuit of greater profits, lower taxes
and greater autonomy. Furthermore, theorists of liberal democracy have never
really admitted that the political right have very little respect for the basic
tenets of 'liberal democracy'. Which is hardly surprising because as Corey Robin
points out, the politics of the right are reactionary. They seek to return power
and money to elites. Of course such a system of reactionary power is also
unstable. It tends to result in economic and cultural stagnation, and creates
the conditions that lead to popular revolts that revert back to some form of
liberal democracy.

I think instead of thinking of the end of history, it is more productive to
think of this moment dialectically. We are living in a period where we are
cycling through two bankrupt political systems. Neither can really solve the
problems that we are living through, but we are unable to break out of them. In
that sense we are living through the 'end of history' - not because all
historical change has ended, but simply because it is impossible to imagine the
next steps from here.

## The Reemergence of History

One reason why it seems ridiculous to talk of the end of history at the moment
is because events have reemerged with a vengeance. Global warming is
destablizing our world in ways that may end human civilization if left
unchecked, a new power (China) with little respect for liberal democracy is
rising in the world, assumptions of globalization are starting to be questioned
while the west (defined as the EU, US and Japan) are becoming increasingly
sclerotic. The US in particular is demonstrating that its political
institutions, mostly unchanged since the 1790s, are incapable of solving deep
set social and institutional problems.

Clearly many of these things can be overstated. China is still a relatively poor
country, the US has overwhelming military power and the EU core is still very
competent. But other challenges tend to be understated. In particular the
environmental crisis is far worse than almost anyone wants to admit. In the US
the west is on fire for much of the year and is living through a 20 year
megadrought (which may just be the new climate for the west), farming areas are
starting to fail due to extreme weather and severe flooding has become so common
that they barely get covered in the national media. Each time a new extreme is
reached, such as this weeks insane temperatures in places like Seattle, they
define a new normal. Covered for a week by breathless reporters, forgotten in a
month. Meanwhile politicians do their best to protect fossil fuel interests.

In a similar fashion, while there are lots of breathless articles on the threat
of populism, there's far less coverage of a more unsettling political reality.
Or rather that in almost every western country there is no longer any meaningful
politics. Yes parties might battle it out for control of symbolic institutions,
but those parties don't represent any meaningful political ideology that
addresses the problems we face. On the right we have mixtures of herrenvolk,
patriarchal and chivalric ideologies - on the left we have ideologies of social
(but not politico-economic) equality. Just a cycle of continual culture war,
while the world burns and the elites loot. Neoliberalism hangs around like an
unwanted guest, but noone really believes in it anymore even if it's all they
know how to do.

It is very hard to say what any of these things mean for our future, but one
thing is clear. The current moment is not stable. It is impossible to imagine
things continuing as they are, even if its equally impossible to imagine a way
out that doesn't involve mass starvation and death.

## Escaping the End of History

The project of this blog is twofold:
1. To take a clear, unvarnished, look at our current moment.
2. To try and imagine a way out of our current predicament.

I don't really expect anyone to read this, and the main purpose is to provide a
way for me to sort out messy thoughts on these issues. It may lead to writing
articles for leftwing journals, but then again it may not. Most likely this is
me dealing with a midlife crisis.

My starting point for this is a mixture of left-libertarianism, marxism and
ecological. That is I want to live in a world where we live in harmony with
nature (whatever that might mean), and where ordinary people are free to pursue
their personal projects free of the constraints of poverty, bosses and social
hierarchy.  An old dream, but one which seems to be rarely articulated these
days.

As for who I am beyond that:
- a technologist who is very skeptical of technology and its claims.
- a member of the bourgeoise who loathes the culture of the bourgeoise.
- an intellectual who mostly dislikes intellectuals.
- a British ex-pat living in the US who dislikes both countries.
- someone with strong political views who avoids activism.

Hopefully by acknowleding these things I can to some degree overcome them, and
in a way a theme of this blog will be to try and examine our preconceptions and
look at possibilities that we find uncomfortable in Anglo countries. The
politics of communalism, reconsidering religion, critiquing hobbyist socialist
politics and so forth.

It probably won't be super interesting TBH, but hey, it's a hobby.
